Add 'Cache (C++)' tutorial (#196)
ros2/message_filters: doc/Tutorials/Cache-Cpp.rst

Cache (C++):
---------------------------------------

Overview
~~~~~~~~

This tutorial demonstrates how to use the ``message_filters.Cache`` class in ROS 2 using C++.
The ``Cache`` filter stores a time history of messages and allows querying based on timestamps.

We will use ``std_msgs.msg.String`` message for clarity and simplicity.

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> This tutorial assumes you have a working knowledge of ROS 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial assumes you have a working knowledge of ROS 2.
```

If you have not done so already `create a workspace <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Creating-A-Workspace/Creating-A-Workspace.html>`_ and `create a package <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Creating-Your-First-ROS2-Package.html>`_

> 1. Create a Basic Node with Includes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have not done so already `create a workspace <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Creating-A-Workspace/Creating-A-Workspace.html>`_ and `create a package <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Creating-Your-First-ROS2-Package.html>`_

1. Create a Basic Node with Includes
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Let's assume, you've already created an empty ros package for C++.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's assume, you've already created an empty ROS package for C++.
```

The next step is to create a new C++ file inside your package, e.g., ``cache_tutorial.cpp``, and create an example node:

.. code-block:: C++

  #include <chrono>

>   #include <functional>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  #include <functional>
  #include <memory>
  #include <string>
```

  
    void query_timer_callback() {
      rclcpp::Time latest_time = cache_filter_.getLatestTime();
    
      if (latest_time == rclcpp::Time()) {
        RCLCPP_INFO(
          this->get_logger(), "Cache is empty"
        );
        return;
      }
    
      rclcpp::Time oldest_time = cache_filter_.getOldestTime();
    
      RCLCPP_INFO(
        this->get_logger(),
        "oldest_time: %f, latest_time: %f",
        latest_time.seconds(),
        oldest_time.seconds()
      );
    }
  
  private:
    rclcpp::Publisher<std_msgs::msg::String>::SharedPtr publisher_;
    rclcpp::TimerBase::SharedPtr publisher_timer_;
    rclcpp::TimerBase::SharedPtr query_timer_;
  
    message_filters::Subscriber<std_msgs::msg::String> subscriber_filter_;
    message_filters::Cache<std_msgs::msg::String> cache_filter_{subscriber_filter_, 10, true};
  };
  
  
  int main(int argc, char ** argv)
  {
    rclcpp::init(argc, argv);
    auto cache_node = std::make_shared<CacheNode>();
    rclcpp::spin(cache_node);
    rclcpp::shutdown();
  
    return 0;
  }
  

1.1 Examine the code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Now, let's break down this code and examine the details.

.. code-block:: C++

  #include <chrono>

>   #include <functional>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  #include <functional>
  #include <memory>
  #include <string>
```

  #include "rclcpp/rclcpp.hpp"

  #include "message_filters/subscriber.hpp"
  #include "message_filters/cache.hpp"

  #include "std_msgs/msg/string.hpp"

  using namespace std::chrono_literals;
  

> We start by including ``chrono`` and ``functional`` headers. The ``chrono`` header is required for ``chrono_literals`` namespace, and the ``functional`` header is required to use ``std::bind`` function to bind timer callbacks to timers.

Reviewer: Include for `memory` and `string` headers
```suggestion
We start by including ``chrono`` and ``functional`` headers. 
The ``chrono`` header is required for ``chrono_literals`` namespace, and the ``functional`` header is required to use ``std::bind`` function to bind timer callbacks to timers.
```

After that we include the ``rclcpp.hpp`` header that provides us with classes from ``rclcpp`` namespace.

> To use filters in our code we need corresponding headers as well. In this case we include ``subscriber.hpp`` and ``cache.hpp``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use filters in our code we need corresponding headers as well. 
In this case we include ``subscriber.hpp`` and ``cache.hpp``.
```

      );
    
      query_timer_ = this->create_wall_timer(
        1s,
        std::bind(&CacheNode::query_timer_callback, this)
      );
    }
    
Here we create a ``publisher_``, that is going to publish messages to some topic

.. code-block:: C++

      publisher_ = this->create_publisher<std_msgs::msg::String>(TUTORIAL_TOPIC_NAME, qos);

When the publisher is created we subscribe to a topic via ``subscriber_filter_``

.. code-block:: C++

      subscriber_filter_.subscribe(this, TUTORIAL_TOPIC_NAME, qos);

After that all what's left to be done is to create timers and we are good to go

.. code-block:: C++

      publisher_timer_ = this->create_wall_timer(
        1s,
        std::bind(&CacheNode::publisher_timer_callback, this)
      );
    
      query_timer_ = this->create_wall_timer(
        1s,
        std::bind(&CacheNode::query_timer_callback, this)
      );

The ``main`` function in this case is pretty straightforward

.. code-block:: C++

  int main(int argc, char ** argv)
  {
    rclcpp::init(argc, argv);
    auto cache_node = std::make_shared<CacheNode>();
    rclcpp::spin(cache_node);
    rclcpp::shutdown();
  
    return 0;
  }

> 2. Update package.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }

2. Update package.xml
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Navigate to your package root and add the following dependencies in ``package.xml``:

.. code-block:: xml

    <depend>rclcpp</depend>
    <depend>message_filters</depend>
    <depend>std_msgs</depend>

3. Add the Node to a CMakeLists.txt
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now open the ``CMakeLists.txt`` add the executable and name it ``cache_tutorial``, which you’ll use later with ``ros2 run``.

.. code-block:: CMake

	find_package(ament_cmake_auto REQUIRED)
	ament_auto_find_build_dependencies()

	ament_auto_add_executable(cache_tutorial src/cache_tutorial.cpp)

Finally, add the install(TARGETS…) section so ros2 run can find your executable:

.. code-block:: CMake

	install(TARGETS cache_tutorial

>   	DESTINATION lib/${PROJECT_NAME})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	install(TARGETS cache_tutorial
  	  DESTINATION lib/${PROJECT_NAME})
```

  
4. Build Your Package
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

From the root of your workspace:

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Linux

        .. code-block:: console

             $ colcon build && . install/setup.bash

    .. group-tab:: macOS

        .. code-block:: console

            $ colcon build && . install/setup.bash

    .. group-tab:: Windows

        .. code-block:: console

            $ colcon build
            $ call C:\dev\ros2\local_setup.bat

5. Run the Node
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now run the node using:

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: console
```

    ros2 run pkg_name cache_tutorial

The first message in the output is going to be

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: console
```

	[INFO] [1752701571.845039452] [cahce_node]: Cache is empty
	
As there were no messages published yet, and the cache is empty.
After that, the publisher will start populate the cache with messages:

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: console
```

Cache (C++):

> ---------------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cache (C++):
------------
```

Overview
~~~~~~~~

> This tutorial demonstrates how to use the ``message_filters.Cache`` class in ROS 2 using C++.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrates how to use the ``message_filters::Cache`` class in ROS 2 using C++.
```

We will use ``std_msgs.msg.String`` message for clarity and simplicity.

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
This tutorial assumes you have a working knowledge of ROS 2.

If you have not done so already `create a workspace <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Creating-A-Workspace/Creating-A-Workspace.html>`_ and `create a package <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Creating-Your-First-ROS2-Package.html>`_

1. Create a Basic Node with Includes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let's assume, you've already created an empty ROS package for C++.
The next step is to create a new C++ file inside your package, e.g., ``cache_tutorial.cpp``, and create an example node:

.. code-block:: C++

  #include <chrono>
  #include <functional>
  #include <memory>
  #include <string>

  #include "rclcpp/rclcpp.hpp"

  #include "message_filters/subscriber.hpp"
  #include "message_filters/cache.hpp"

  #include "std_msgs/msg/string.hpp"
	
  using namespace std::chrono_literals;
  
  const std::string TUTORIAL_TOPIC_NAME = "tutorial_topic";
  
  class CacheNode : public rclcpp::Node {
  public:
    CacheNode()

>     : Node("cahce_node")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    : Node("cache_node")
```

    {
      auto qos = rclcpp::QoS(10);
      publisher_ = this->create_publisher<std_msgs::msg::String>(TUTORIAL_TOPIC_NAME, qos);
      subscriber_filter_.subscribe(this, TUTORIAL_TOPIC_NAME, qos);
    
      publisher_timer_ = this->create_wall_timer(
        1s,
        std::bind(&CacheNode::publisher_timer_callback, this)
      );
    
      query_timer_ = this->create_wall_timer(
        1s,
        std::bind(&CacheNode::query_timer_callback, this)
      );
    }
  
    void publisher_timer_callback() {
      auto message = std_msgs::msg::String();
      message.data = "example string";
      publisher_->publish(message);
    }
  
    void query_timer_callback() {
      rclcpp::Time latest_time = cache_filter_.getLatestTime();
    
      if (latest_time == rclcpp::Time()) {
        RCLCPP_INFO(
          this->get_logger(), "Cache is empty"
        );
        return;
      }
    
      rclcpp::Time oldest_time = cache_filter_.getOldestTime();
    
      RCLCPP_INFO(
        this->get_logger(),
        "oldest_time: %f, latest_time: %f",
        latest_time.seconds(),
        oldest_time.seconds()
      );
    }
  
  private:

>     rclcpp::Publisher<std_msgs::msg::String>::SharedPtr publisher_;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    rclcpp::Publisher<std_msgs::msg::String>::SharedPtr publisher_;
    
```

    rclcpp::TimerBase::SharedPtr publisher_timer_;
    rclcpp::TimerBase::SharedPtr query_timer_;
  
    message_filters::Subscriber<std_msgs::msg::String> subscriber_filter_;
    message_filters::Cache<std_msgs::msg::String> cache_filter_{subscriber_filter_, 10, true};
  };
  
  
  int main(int argc, char ** argv)
  {
    rclcpp::init(argc, argv);
    auto cache_node = std::make_shared<CacheNode>();
    rclcpp::spin(cache_node);
    rclcpp::shutdown();
  
    return 0;
  }
  

1.1 Examine the code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Now, let's break down this code and examine the details.

.. code-block:: C++

  #include <chrono>
  #include <functional>
  #include <memory>
  #include <string>

  #include "rclcpp/rclcpp.hpp"

  #include "message_filters/subscriber.hpp"
  #include "message_filters/cache.hpp"

  #include "std_msgs/msg/string.hpp"

  using namespace std::chrono_literals;
  
We start by including ``chrono`` and ``functional`` headers.

> The ``chrono`` header is required for ``chrono_literals`` namespace, and the ``functional`` header is required to use ``std::bind`` function to bind timer callbacks to timers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``chrono`` header is required for the ``chrono_literals`` namespace, necessary for creating timers.
 The ``functional`` header is also required to use ``std::bind`` function to bind timer callbacks to timers.
```

After that we include the ``rclcpp.hpp`` header that provides us with classes from ``rclcpp`` namespace.
To use filters in our code we need corresponding headers as well.
In this case we include ``subscriber.hpp`` and ``cache.hpp``.
And finally we add ``string.hpp`` to get access to ``String`` message class from the ROS standard messages library.

Next we define a tutorial class.
In this case it is the ``CacheNode`` class.

> For starters, let's take a look at a ``private`` section of this class:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For starters, let's take a look at the ``private`` section of this class:
```

.. code-block:: C++

    rclcpp::Publisher<std_msgs::msg::String>::SharedPtr publisher_;
    
    rclcpp::TimerBase::SharedPtr publisher_timer_;
    rclcpp::TimerBase::SharedPtr query_timer_;
  
    message_filters::Subscriber<std_msgs::msg::String> subscriber_filter_;
    message_filters::Cache<std_msgs::msg::String> cache_filter_{subscriber_filter_, 10, true};

To publish messages we will need a ``Publisher`` object.
To automate publishing messages and for querying the cache filter we add two timers, the ``publisher_timer_`` and the ``query_timer_`` respectively.
After all that we add two filters and chain them together.

> We start with a ``Subscriber`` filter, that is going to be and entry point for the messages into our chain of filters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We start with a ``Subscriber`` filter, that is going to be an entry point for the messages into our chain of filters.
```

> And after that we create a ``Cache`` filter object, that is going to cache the messages, passing down the filters chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After that we create a ``Cache`` filter object, which is going to store and create a history of messages.
```

Please note, that when the ``cache_filter_`` is created, the previous filter, the ``subscriber_filter_`` is passed as the first argument.
It is the way to chain these two filters together.

> Message is going to pass from a topic, through ``subscriber_filter_`` into ``cache_filter_``, and in some other filter if it is added down the chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A message is going to pass from a topic, through ``subscriber_filter_`` into ``cache_filter_``, from which it will be processed.
```
Maybe I'm wrong, but I'd rather keep the scope of filtration to this example, since all filters can take in another filter.

> The second argument of the ``Cache`` filter constructor is a cache size, and the last one is the ``allow_headerless`` flag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second argument of the ``Cache`` constructor is ``cache size``, the maximum allotted messages to be stored in the cache.
The last argument is the ``allow_headerless`` flag, which is required to cache the ``String`` messages, that do not have a ``Header`` field.
```
Probably a good idea to just brief the reader on why cache size is useful

> The ``allow_headerless`` flag is required to cache the ``String`` messages, that do not have a ``Header`` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

In this case, the time the message was received is used, but only in case if the message class does not have a ``Header``.
If there is one, then the time from ``Header`` is used.
If the ``allow_headerless`` flag is set to ``false``, it is impossible to use messages without header.

It may be useful to point out that the ``Subscriber`` filter is not the only way to start a chain of filters.
One may consider using ``SimpleFilter``.
It does not create a new subscription on it's own and may be used directly in a subscription callback instead.

> Also there is an option to directly put messages into ``Cache`` filter, by calling the ``add`` method of a ``cache`` filter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is an option to directly put messages into ``Cache`` filter, by calling the ``add`` method of a ``cache`` filter.
```
Necessary to keep the scope at a minimum preventing information overload.

> There is, as well, an option to create an instance of the ``Cahce`` filter on it's own, and pass messages to it via the ``add`` method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is, as well, an option to create an instance of the ``Cache`` filter on it's own, and pass messages to it via the ``add`` method.
```

Next let's take a look at timer callbacks.

.. code-block:: C++

  void publisher_timer_callback() {
    auto message = std_msgs::msg::String();
    message.data = "example string";
    publisher_->publish(message);
  }

  void query_timer_callback() {
    rclcpp::Time latest_time = cache_filter_.getLatestTime();

    if (latest_time == rclcpp::Time()) {
      RCLCPP_INFO(
        this->get_logger(), "Cache is empty"
      );
      return;
    }

    rclcpp::Time oldest_time = cache_filter_.getOldestTime();

    RCLCPP_INFO(
      this->get_logger(),
      "oldest_time: %f, latest_time: %f",
      latest_time.seconds(),
      oldest_time.seconds()
    );
  }

> Now it is worthy to draw some attention to the following line of code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now it is worthy to draw some attention to the following line of code.
```

.. code-block:: C++

	if (latest_time == rclcpp::Time())
	

> As we use in this tutorial the headerless ``String`` message, the time source for this message is the default ``RCL_SYSTEM_TIME``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since we use the headerless ``String`` message in this tutorial, the time source for this message is the default ``RCL_SYSTEM_TIME``.
```

If we would use messages with headers, the expected time source for them would be the ``RCL_ROS_TIME``.

> Finally, let's take a look at the class constructor

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, let's take a look at the class constructor.
```

.. code-block:: C++

    CacheNode()

>     : Node("cahce_node")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    : Node("cache_node")
```

    {
      auto qos = rclcpp::QoS(10);
      publisher_ = this->create_publisher<std_msgs::msg::String>(TUTORIAL_TOPIC_NAME, qos);
      subscriber_filter_.subscribe(this, TUTORIAL_TOPIC_NAME, qos);
    
      publisher_timer_ = this->create_wall_timer(
        1s,
        std::bind(&CacheNode::publisher_timer_callback, this)
      );
    
      query_timer_ = this->create_wall_timer(
        1s,
        std::bind(&CacheNode::query_timer_callback, this)
      );
    }
    

> Here we create a ``publisher_``, that is going to publish messages to some topic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here we create a ``publisher_``, that is going to publish messages to some topic.
```

.. code-block:: C++

      publisher_ = this->create_publisher<std_msgs::msg::String>(TUTORIAL_TOPIC_NAME, qos);

> When the publisher is created we subscribe to a topic via ``subscriber_filter_``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the publisher is created we subscribe to a topic via ``subscriber_filter_``.
```

.. code-block:: C++

      subscriber_filter_.subscribe(this, TUTORIAL_TOPIC_NAME, qos);

> After that all what's left to be done is to create timers and we are good to go

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After that all what's left to be done is to create timers and we are good to go.
```

.. code-block:: C++

      publisher_timer_ = this->create_wall_timer(
        1s,
        std::bind(&CacheNode::publisher_timer_callback, this)
      );
    
      query_timer_ = this->create_wall_timer(
        1s,
        std::bind(&CacheNode::query_timer_callback, this)
      );

> The ``main`` function in this case is pretty straightforward

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``main`` function in this case is pretty straightforward.
```
